CSCE 578 Spring 2019
Ainsley McWaters
Final Project Report

	For this project, I really wanted to focused on application of the concepts and implementations we learned throughout this semester, but in the process of application, I aimed to work on topics and texts that would directly interest/engage/and further me as a student.  I think I have accomplished this in this project.  It is not what some of the other students would do, looking at very complicated tasks and algorithms and programming them into utter perfection.  It is simply that some of these ideas took me longer to implement than they would others, but because of this project I am more confident in my abilities to engage texts computationally, and therefore I have no regrets.

Reviewing what I proposed, it says that I will implement tf-idf on documents per-year (I've done that).  It says I will find out what words co-occur with special keywords (I haven't managed that due to simply running out of time) by taking the cosine similarity of words from the PPMI matrix.  I wanted to also to perform a singular value decomposition over the PPMI matrix in order to reduce the dimensions and improve semantic analysis (time constraints forbids this, as well).  Lastly, I planned to stem and clean the text as thoroughly as possible, which is an ongoing struggle.  

One thing, before getting started with what I DID accomplish: I plan to continue working on this project the moment finals end.  It excites me deeply, and I'm passionate about not only the topic (critical response to Walt Whitman's work across his lifetime) but the activity of analyzing text in this way itself.

What I did accomplish is this: accessing a database of my own creation (in an external, Javascript file), and collecting all documents and putting them in txt files distributed by year.  I then did some basic cleaning in that Javascript file, as all of the texts are hand-tagged (by me) with html so that it formats well on the upcoming website (I began doing things that way before I knew any other way!).  I then imported the texts, and performed tf-idf on them by year and printed out the results.  I then clustered and discovered something very interesting (discussed later).  I then spent hours and hours creating an implementation of finding the PMI on the documents by year, and I think I accomplished this although I'm fuzzy on what exactly each value means.  More studying is necessary.  My final plans were to do a keyword search to return the tf-idf for the word as it changed on a histogram using a visualization library.  I then wanted to go back and clean the document far more so that my results would be more crisp and clear, rather than getting bogged down by words that got missed.  Finally, to do co-occurrences, which I've demonstrated that I can easily do in the previous project.  I at no point delayed work or procrastinated on this project, but amongst all my end-of-semester tasks and some *happenings* that I'd rather not continue to complain about to everyone I know, I just ran out of time.  I'm excited beyond reason to jump right into implementing these last few tasks, but it will have to be after the finals have ended, as I have another project due tomorrow and the 355 projects due (now) Friday, and my magellan presentation on Friday. 

After I had played with printout of the PMI results, I discovered two things: 1) The most frequent words happen at the negative values (which might be positive, it's possible that one of the functions flips them and I don't fix it), and 2) The least frequent words happen at the positive.  I found from both the PMI and the TF-IDF results that Whitman had a strong presence throughout his life associated with poetry.  What I *know* would come up if I did bigrams and co-occurrences, is that whether the words next to or around it were positive or negative, which varies greatly.  I think the most interesting results from TF-IDF and PMI are the names associated with Whitman, and how they arise in certain years and fade away in others, which is what is that most interesting result of my research as a whole--Whitman's persona was largely affected by how he was presented in association with or by other people.  So, when "Rossetti" shows up in a certain year, it means that Rossetti was the big name associated with Whitman, and for good reason, as he is a unique, frequent, and interesting mention.  You can trace the results of the tf-idf and pmi results through Whitman's life and show how reviewers were paying attention to not only Whitman's work, but to how he presented himself.  

However, as a result of words like "poem" and "poetry," the clustering goes haywire!  Furthermore, even more frequently changing and appearing than names are the very topics of his work, as those changed with the times.  Work and labor became war and Lincoln became pioneers and steam engines. It becomes apparent by the way in which the clustering process tends to always group as many years together as possible in a single cluster, that Whitman, to reviewers, may have never really changed. Mayhaps we can attribute that to the shocking yet engaging nature of Whitman's work, and therefore his POETRY could never die to his CELEBRITY.  

I hope this project finds you well, and I'm looking forward to sending you my FINAL final project before June.  

-Ainsley McWaters 4/24/2019

 
